DESCRIPTION OF DQD

This document provides an overview of the Delivery Quantity Distributer (DQD) and 
specific information on technical aspects of this application. DQD is a tool 
that will distribute a given quantity of contract deliverables over a given time 
period in accordance with several common factory deliverable profiles (flat line, 
ramp up, ramp down and a bell curve). For example, if a contract requires delivering 
120 radios over 12 months, a "flat-line" distribution will display a result showing 
a 12 month period with 10 radios arriving each month.
 
In the first screen, users enter data needed to perform the required distribution
(plus some other pertinent contract-related data) and if the data is entered 
without errors, a "Submit" button is enabled. Clicking this button displays a second 
screen with the resulting distribution.

The second screen allows a user to make adjustments (if needed) to the system-generated
distribution (for example, a factory may be closed for two weeks in December, and to 
make up the difference, the factory may work overtime in November and January and 
deliver more radios in each of those months). If there are no validation errors
on the second screen, the distribution can be saved to a database by clicking a button
(in this demo version of DQD, the ability to save the data to a database is not included
- an error message will display if the "Save to Database" button is clicked).

The default distributions are calculated by DQD. There is an option to allow a Large 
Language Model (LLM - commonly referred to as "AI") to do the distribution instead of 
using the DQD formulas. If this option is selected, the user-entered data is included 
in a prompt which is sent to an LLM (Meta Llama 3.2 specifically). The LLM returns the 
result and the second screen displays the LLM distribution. LLMs can deliver inconsistent 
results, so see the spreadsheet on the DQD homepage that graphs some LLM-generated 
distributions and compares them to graphs of the DQD-generated results with the same inputs.
NOTE: THE AI OPTION HAS NOT BEEN ENABLED FOR THIS VERSION OF DQD.


THE DQD VALIDATION FRAMEWORK

DQD includes an internally-developed framework for validating user inputs. This framework 
has been designed to be:

 1) as language agnostic as possible (C and JavaScript versions exist so far);

 2) flexible enough to be easily incorporated into other applications;

 3) easily maintainable so that removing or changing existing validations,
    adding new validations to existing fields or adding new fields with validations
    is quick, easy and resistant to the introduction of coding errors; 

 4) data-driven so that validation invocation, relationships and messages to display
    are maintained as Boolean entries in simple data structures (arrays); and

 3) lightweight and fast.

In this usage, it is applied to the first screen where it validates user inputs, displays 
error messages and prevents the application from advancing until the errors are corrected. 
It could however, be easily applied to validate automated inputs received on a server from 
other systems or sensors and perform appropriate actions. 

Information is provided here that provides the necessary context and background to 
understand how the validation framework functions when it is applied to the DQD input 
screen. A description of the features is below, followed by some example entries that 
illustrate these features.

The DQD validation framework:

 • allows a minimum number of characters to be entered before validation begins
   (e.g. entering "@02" triggers no validation in a field requiring the input of
   a calendar or fiscal year with four digits, appending a "4" to this input
   triggers an error and resulting message requiring a valid year entry);

 • permits validations for data integrity on single fields (e.g. entering 
   "t" instead of "5" in a quantity field triggers a message indicating that 
   a valid integer must be entered);

 • permits validations on relationships that involve more than one field
   (e.g. entering "50" for estimated speed in MPH, "3" for estimated time in hours
   and "200" for total distance in miles to be traveled triggers a message warning 
   that the distance traveled exceeds the speed multiplied by the travel time);

 • incorporates a feature that displays relevant messages where they apply so that
   as the user clicks around the screen, messages that can be addressed in that field 
   move with the user (e.g. using the multiple field validation described above, if the 
   user enters "200" in the distance field as the last of the three entries, the system
   will highlight the field and display the message described above, however, if the 
   user then clicks in the estimated speed field, the message now displays in the 
   speed field, the same applies if the user doesn't fix the issue and next clicks in 
   the estimated time field - note that messages don't move to the current field if 
   that relationship doesn't include that field, i.e. if the user next clicked on the 
   field requiring the entry of a valid year, the speed multiplied by hours not equaling 
   distance traveled stays in the last active field of those three) and    

 • easily allows changing how the messages are displayed for a UI (it's easy to
   change from displaying them in a tooltip to displaying them in a message box:
   this can be readily seen by opening DQD in a desktop browser and comparing 
   how messages are displayed there with how they are displayed when DQD is opened in 
   a mobile browser). 


Follow the steps below to better understand the features described above.

1) Open the initial entry screen for DQD from the DQD General Information page. 
2) Click in the cell labeled "Enter the FY for the contract" in the upper left, and 
   enter an invalid entry for a year that should be in the YYYY format (e.g. "@024" or 
   "tyr4"). The cell should be highlighted indicating an invalid entry, but notice that 
   no validations are run until at least 4 characters are entered. Correct the input to 
   show a future fiscal year (a fiscal year runs from 1 October in one year to 30 
   September the following year and is referred to as Fiscal Year or FY XXXX where XXXX 
   is the calendar year in which the 30 September date falls, i.e. the FY encompassing 
   1 Oct 2009 - 30 Sep 2010 is labeled FY 2010). 
3) Click in the cell labeled "Enter the monthly maximum production rate" in the upper 
   right. This field requires an integer entry so try entering "u". Notice that the 
   cell is highlighted and an error displays: in this case, the validation is run 
   immediately, i.e. the minimum number of characters required before the validations 
   are run is set to 1 for this field. Correct the entry to "10" and this will clear 
   the error.
4) Click in the cell labeled "Enter the month and calendar year for the first item 
   delivery date" in the upper center of the screen and enter a date that is before the 
   beginning of the FY entered in Step 2 above (e.g. for FY YYYY, enter a month and year 
   that is earlier than 1 October of YYYY - 1). The cell should be highlighted and an 
   error should display indicating that the first item delivery cannot occur before the 
   FY used to fund the contract (i.e. money authorized for expenditure in a given year 
   cannot be used to purchase items that will be delivered in an earlier year). Clear 
   the error by entering a date that occurs during or after the FY entered in Step 2.
5) Click in the cell labeled "Enter the number of months over which deliveries will 
   occur" in the center of the screen and enter the number "13". The cell should be 
   highlighted and an error should display indicating that for FYs in the future, 
   delivery periods must be 12 months or fewer (the US Congress allocates money yearly
   and does not allow federal employees to obligate the government to pay for services
   or goods under a contract that runs for more than 12 months, note however that there
   are exceptions and workarounds for this). Leave this as "13" for now.
6) Click in the cell labeled "Enter total deliveries" in the lower center of the 
   screen and enter the number "150". This cell should be highlighted and this error 
   message should display: "Delivery quantity cannot exceed the Maximum Monthly 
   Production quantity multiplied by the number of months in the delivery period." This
   occurs because if the factory can produce at most 10 items per month, a production
   run of 12 months can only delivery a total of 120 items, yet the entry in this field 
   indicates that 150 are to be delivered. Leave this entry at "150" for now.
7) Click in the cell labeled "Enter the FY for the contract" in the upper left. Notice 
   that the highlight on the cell labeled "Enter the number of months over which 
   deliveries will occur" has been cleared and the highlight now moves to this cell. 
   This error can be fixed in two ways: either the delivery period can be made shorter 
   than 13 months or the fiscal year can be changed to a earlier year (contract periods
   can be greater than 13 months for current or prior fiscal years because they reflect
   reality, i.e. a contract designed to run for 12 months can experience delays for 
   many different reasons, e.g. a hurricane can shut down a factory for several months
   or a competitor can file a contract protest which results in a stop-work order). 
   Don't make any changes in this cell.
8) Now click back in the cell labeled "Enter the number of months over which deliveries 
   will occur". Notice that the highlights have changed for two different cells: the 
   last active cell from step 7 is no longer highlighted and the "Enter total deliveries" 
   cell is no longer highlighted - only the active cell is highlighted. This occurs 
   because two different validations across five cells share this one common cell and 
   both messages display on this cell because (in theory) both issues could be fixed by 
   changing the value in this cell (in this particular example, it will take changes to 
   entries in two cells to clear both these errors). Don't make any changes to this 
   entry yet.
9) Finally, click in the cell labeled "Enter the monthly maximum production rate" and 
   notice that in this case, the last active cell remains highlighted and this cell has 
   also been highlighted. In this case, the error message indicating that a future year 
   contract cannot be more than 13 months cannot be fixed by an entry in this cell so the
   highlight stays on the cell labeled " Enter the number of months over which deliveries 
   will occur" however, the error message "Delivery quantity cannot exceed the Maximum 
   Monthly Production quantity multiplied by the number of months in the delivery period." 
   can be fixed by an entry in the current cell so the highlight moves to this cell.
10) Fix the error for this cell by changing the entry from "10" to "100". Next click
   in the cell labeled "Enter the number of months over which deliveries will occur" and 
   change the entry from "13" to "12". All errors should now be cleared, however the 
   "Submit" should not be enabled.
11) Finally select a distribution profile and the "Submit" button should now be enabled 
   because all required entries have been made and there are no errors. Click this button
   to open the second screen and see the resulting contract delivery schedule. 

  



    
      

  








